Abstract (500 words)

Title- GRNsight: Software for Visualization of Gene Regulatory Networks

Although numerous analysis and visualization software exists for network visualization, there has been little research on how to optimize visualization software for small-to medium scale, unweighted and weighted, directed network graphs. In the domain of systems biology, a network visualization of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is particularly useful for adding value to the interpretation of modeling results, allowing users to leverage visualization to drive insights from their data. A GRN consists of genes, transcription factors, and the regulatory connections between them which govern the level of expression of mRNA and protein from genes. Our solution to fill this niche of visualization software is GRNsight, a web application and service architected for visualizing networks of fewer than 35 nodes and 70 edges, with general applicability for displaying any small network with directed edges for systems biology or other application domains. GRNsight extends and applies research in human computer interaction (HCI), network visualization, and software engineering best practices. GRNsight produces weighted or unweighted network graphs from an Excel spreadsheet containing an adjacency matrix where regulators are named in the columns and target genes in the rows, a Simple Interaction Format (SIF) text file, or a GraphML XML file. GRNsight represents genes as nodes and regulatory connections as directed edges with colors, end markers, and thicknesses corresponding to the sign and magnitude of activation or repression of the target gene. GRNsight is written in JavaScript, with diagrams facilitated by D3.js, a data visualization library, and uses Node.js and the Express framework to handle server-side functions. An SVG graph is generated from network data provided by our web API server, using D3.js mapping and layout routines to map gene objects onto labeled rectangles and edge weights into Bezier curves. The resulting graph is interactive, initially using D3.js’s force graph layout algorithm to automatically determine the positions of the gene rectangles. The user can then drag the rectangles and modify force graph parameters to improve the graph’s layout. Since the release of GRNsight v1, feedback from peer review and the related GRNmap software modeling team have motivated improvements in GRNsight v2. GRNsight v2 features increased user control over the network visualization's bounding box and viewport size, as well as the way edges and their weights are displayed. We have successfully built upon GRNsight in v2 to expand its visualization and layout capabilities, giving the user more control over the visual display of the network graph. GRNsight's visualization and automatic layout of unweighted and weighted network graphs enables the interpretation of weight parameters more easily than one could from an adjacency matrix alone. GRNsight is in active development, closely interacting with the GRNmap modeling group. We plan to add features to compute and display graph statistics, such as betweenness centrality, and provide different graph layout options, such as a hierarchical or block layout, as well as explore the effectiveness of alternate visualization paradigms for biologist users who are seeking visual insight into GRNs.
